[Music]
Hi, I'm Norman Wildberger, and today we're going
to talk about laws of arithmetic. This is part
of our foundations of mathematics series. So I
remind you up till now what we've done is first
of all established what are the natural numbers. A
natural number is just a string of ones, and they
form this very natural sequence like this. We have
two operations: addition and multiplication. The
addition of two natural numbers is just what
you get when you combine them by juxtaposing
them in the simplest possible way. Multiplication
is what you get when you take this many groups of
that one. So in other words, for every one in this
first number, you put a copy of the second number.
So 2 times 3 is 2 copies of 3: one there and one
there. And there are various laws. There are the
laws for addition: the commutative and associative
laws. There are laws for multiplication:
the commutative, associative, and identity laws,
and 2 distributive laws. And I left it to you
as a challenge last time to try to prove these
laws. Here we've already talked about these ones,
and this one is obvious. So today we want to talk
about why these laws are true, and we'll start
with the commutative law of multiplication, which
says that n times m equals m times n. This is,
in some sense, the most interesting of the laws.
Here's an example: 2 times 3. We have two groups
of three: one there and one there. On the other
hand, if we think about three groups of two, or
three times two, we have three groups of two. Why
should it be that two groups of three is the same
as three groups of two? This is already a subtle
point, and to explain why, let me change notation
just slightly, just temporarily. Instead of using
little sticks, I'll use circles for our basic
entities. So I've just rewritten here is two times
three: two groups of three. And now what I'm going
to do is I'm going to take those circles and I'm
going to rearrange them. Instead of putting them
all in a row, I'm going to put one group of three
there and the other group of three on top of them.
Over here I've got three times two: that's three
groups of two, two, two, two. And again, I'm going
to do the same thing: I'm going to put the first
row there, then another row, and then another row.
So we have three groups of two stacked on top of
each other. Now why are these two the same? It's
because these two configurations visibly have
the same number of elements. We get one from
the other just by flipping. Our next law is the
associative law for multiplication: k times n done
first times m is the same as k times what you get
when you take n times m. So let's illustrate with
an example. Suppose k is 2 and n is 3, and I'm not
going to suppose that m is anything in particular,
so we'll leave n as m as general. So we have 2
times 3 times m. The brackets tell us we need to
do 2 times 3 first: there's two groups of three,
so we have two groups of three times m. I remind
you how to multiply: we simply have to replace
each one of the ones here with a copy of this
thing, so we have altogether n by m and then m.
Let me do it this way: when we do it the other
way, it's 2 times 3 times m, so that's 2 times
what is three times m? It's what you get when you
replace each of the ones here with an m, so mmm.
We get 2 times m: that means we replace each one
of these with a copy of those, so we get mmm,
mmm, and we can see that we get the same thing
because in each case what we're really getting
is 2 times 3: there's 2 times 3 of them there,
and there's 2 times 3 of them there, and what m
is is immaterial. It will always be equal even
if we don't use 2 and 3, use 3 and 4, or 4 and 5,
or anything else. Now the distributive laws, which
combine addition and multiplication. So the first
one is k times n plus m equals k times n plus k
times m. Now I remind you this means we do this
multiplication and the multiplication before we
do the addition. Let's look at an example: suppose
k is 3, n is 2, and m is 1. Then k times n plus
m will be 3 times where this sum is 3, and I've
written the 3 in a way that keeps track of where
the ones came from. So these two I'll mark in red
and this one in green, so if two red ones and one
green one, as opposed to three times that. So we
have one group, another group, another group. Now
we are going to rearrange those: we're going to
take all the ones of the same color together,
so there are three groups of two red ones. We'll
put them all together there, and we'll bring all
the green ones: there's three ones over that side.
And we see that what we end up having is, in terms
of the red ones, is three times two between
three groups of two red ones, and also we have
three groups of one green one. So 3 times 2 plus
1 is 3 times 2 plus 3 times 1, and this argument
shows why it's true in general: we can always do
this kind of rearranging to convert this to this.
Alright, what about the other distributive law? We
could do it in the same way, but let me illustrate
another way of thinking about it using the laws
we've already established. If we have k plus n
times m, we can use the commutative law to rewrite
that as m times k plus n. It's just commutativity,
and now we can use the distributive law we've
just proven to write that as m times k plus m
times n. And each one of these two products can
be rewritten using the commutative law, so that
becomes k times m, and this one becomes n times
m, and that's what we require. So we have now
proven all the laws of arithmetic so far. These
are the main laws of mathematics, and I think
you can see that the arguments are simple enough
that with some patience, you could explain them to
a ten-year-old boy a hundred thousand years ago.
So is this the standard way that mathematicians
think about the laws of arithmetic? No, it's not.
Most mathematicians believe that mathematics is
found on modern set theory, and they follow John
von Neumann's suggestion that we should define
the natural numbers in terms of set theory. Zero,
which we haven't talked about but which represents
nothing, is represented by the empty set. That's
reasonable. One is represented by a set which
contains one element, namely the zero that we've
just defined, so it's a set that contains within
it the empty set. Also, we can't argue too much
with that. However, then the idea is that all
subsequent numbers are defined as sets of previous
numbers. So 2 is defined as , which is this,
and 3 is defined as the set , which is
this, and 4 is defined as the set ,
and so on. And it gets more and more complicated
very quickly. So this is very complicated, it's
overly complicated, it's certainly unintuitive,
it doesn't correspond to the way people think
about numbers, and it's really divorced from
reality. It's an aspect of the way modern set
theory has really distorted the entire discussion
about the foundations of mathematics. Modern set
theory gave rise to the new math some 40-50 years
ago, which we all know now was sort of a disaster,
but less well-known is that it's also contributed
to very shaky and complicated foundations for
mathematics. One of our aims in this series will
be to look very critically at other deficiencies
of modern set theory and to suggest, as we've
done here, replacements, some simpler ways of
thinking about the fundamental concepts. Next
time, subtraction and division: the other two
main operations in arithmetic. I hope you'll join
me. I'm Norman Wildberger, thanks for listening.
Let me know if you need any further assistance!